This video is brought to you by brilliant problem solving based website and app
with a hands on approach,
improve your stem skills while having a great time learning a brilliant
org slash biographics more on them in a bit.
Who do you of when you hear the words, father of the atomic bomb,
we're guessing it's Robert Oppenheimer,
the leader of the man Hatan project who famously responded to the first ABOM
test by declaring. Now I am become death destroyer of worlds,
but what if we told you there was another contender,
a scientist who came this close to making the big break in 1934,
a breakthrough that could have resulted in Nazi Germany,
developing the world's first nuclear weapon.
The scientist who almost created this terrifying alternative reality was on
Rico. Firmi the godfather of the atom bomb,
a leading light in both experimental and theoretical physics.
Firmi was an almost one in a generation genius.
It was Firmi who built the first operational nuclear reactor in 1942.
Firmi who created our understanding of the subtopic particles known today as
firm ons and Firmi who helped Oppenheimer father the bomb from fascist ly to
world Wari America. This is the life of ENCO.
Firmi the greatest Italian scientist. The side of Galileo.
One of the themes we've touched on time. And again,
is that despite what fiction tells you,
you usually can't tell which child is gonna grow up to change the world.
Oon Bismark. For example, was a lazy as a kid mathematician,
any Noha was going to be a language teacher.
Johan Kepler was obsessed with joining the priesthood,
but there are times when even real life follows the rules of fiction times
when you can really just look at a child and think that kid's gonna be world
famous someday ENCO Furney.
He was one of those kids born in Rome on September the 29th,
1901 Firmey came from an average family.
His father was a government railway inspector while his mother Ida was a
teacher, but Ida was above average in one very particular way.
She believed acquiring knowledge was an almost sacred duty.
You might say that this was the closest thing to religion in the Firmi household
for the time the family weren't Catholic.
And they sent young Firmi to one of the few secular schools in Rome,
their age Donie six family began to show signs of the genius that he would
become.
Basically from the moment he started school Firmi was consistently at the top of
his class. I had instilled in him a deep love for math, science,
and engineering and everything else, brainy. We're not studying. The boys,
spent his time building electric motors with his older brother Guo. So yes,
if you'd been introduced to child from circuit 1910,
you'd have probably thought to yourself, Hm, it's gonna be big,
but you might not have guessed.
He'd be big in the world of physics that's because it had take a tragedy to set
firm me on that particular path. In January,
1915 firm's brother went into hospital for routine surgery on a throat.
Absess something went wrong and he died on the operating table,
bleeding out at age, Jonie 15 for the teenage Firmey. This was like,
God had held a lightning bolt right into the middle of his life.
As a boy firm had always been shy and introverted,
but in the wake of Gil's death,
he became almost catatonically withdrawn frightened either tried to convince her
son to lose himself in his studies.
She found a 50 year old book on physics and gave it to the boy to read what
Firmi read there blew his young minds.
There was something about the world described in that book that just made sense
to firm me that made him want to learn more. From that point on the boy,
wouldn't be a magpie leaping from one stem subject to the next,
his mind would instead be a high powered laser focused solely on physics
in 19 18,
3 years after Guo firm applied to the prestigious schooler Noal superior in
Piza on November the 14th that year he sat the entrance exam.
The task was to write a competitive essay. Firmi chose the topic.
Characteristics of sounds. When the examiner read it,
he nearly fell off his chair.
While anyone sitting this exam was naturally intelligent.
Firmi was at a whole different level.
It turns in a paper that would've been impressive for.
A doctoral thesis Firmey was instantly fast tracked onto the school's doctoral
program with his advisor, the director of the physics laboratory.
But the director soon realized this kid was such a natural,
that it was impossible to teach him stuff in just three years of self-study
Firmey had become so good at physics that he could run rings around a department
chair. Everybody at the school could agree on one thing.
They couldn't wait to see what he did next.
At the same time firm was rising through the physics profession,
like an out of control weather balloon.
Another Italian also found himself being CATA towards stardom on March
the 23rd, 19,
19 MI months after Firmi SATs exam Benito mu founded the fascist party.
Although neither Firmi nor mu could have known as at the time their lives were
destined to cross in a way that would change history.
Within a year of the fascist party's appearance chapters had sprung up across
the nation and whole gins descended into violence.
Mu was a world class Rabel rouser or a guy who could whip up a mob in the time
of digs to boil an egg. As his influence spreads,
black sharp militias began attacking leftists,
burning down trade union officers and physically stopping left wing officials
from taking their posts come July, 1922,
the whole of Italy knew MU's name and either loved him or
loathed him with one possible exception.
All his life en Rico Firmi would be staunchly apolitical,
never showing the slightest hints of an interest in politics.
As Italy fell into chaos that summer,
he was likely thinking of only one thing defending his thesis right now.
Firm had already published his first couple of papers and his planet size brain
was infamous across P when he actually came to defend his thesis before 11
examiners,
it said only two of them were capable of crossing what he was talking about.
Firmi graduated with honors almost immediately receiving a governmental grant to
continuous studies.
Not that the governments would be around for much longer though.
That same summer mu black shirts smashed a general strike calls by Italian
leftists on October the 24th,
before a gathering of 40,000 fascists still Duche declared that the government
was incapable of governing and his party would physically remove it from power
MU's March on Rome was the moment democracy died in Italy,
faced with an insurrection.
The government collapsed preferring fascism to anarchy king Victor Manuel II
invited mu to form a new government on Halloween that year a fitting date.
If the revel was one Italy's boulderer fatter version of became prime
minister, the first fascist leader in history,
but while life was about to take a bad turn for Italy in general,
it was taking a series of extremely good turns for en Rico.
Firmi between 1922 and 1926.
Firmi won a series of scholarships going abroad to teach in Germany and the
Netherlands. By the time he settles back in Italy in 90, in 26,
he was ready to change. The world,
offered the chair of theoretical physics at the university of Rome age, just 25.
Firmi made breakthrough after breakthrough,
perhaps his most lasting was the developments of what are known as Firmi direct
statistics.
Basically a way of understanding a group of subatomic particles that would
otherwise make us go what every time we're he thought about them. In fact,
Firmi was so prolific and its intuition so often accurate that his colleagues
started calling him the Pope of physics,
but it wasn't just firm's colleagues who were paying attention to his
extraordinary mind in 1929,
Benito mu now absolute dictator of Italy personally appointed Firmi to the
academia delin. The a physicist was given a huge salary, a uniform to wear,
and the title of excellence,
all he had to do in return was bring glory upon mu Italy by making more
breakthroughs, SC. Well,
that's what happened next in his new post Firmi would soon come terrifyingly
close to giving I Duche the key to the atom bomb.
The next few years were crazy busy for FA in 1928.
He married Laura cap on a daughter of a respected Jewish family with who it have
two children in 1930,
he made us first visit to America were elected on quantum theory.
Shortly after firm seems to have decided the quantum field was becoming
exhausted. He switched his focus to nuclear physics.
It was this switch that would lead to his big breakthrough in 1934 firming and
his team were researching the atom that already discovered that pretty much
every element is capable of nuclear transformation.
And we're now focusing on uranium.
It was while working with the elements that firmly discovered the first step
toward nuclear fishing. Since we are a history channel,
rather than a science channel, we're not qualified to go deep into this,
but the basic gist is that firmly made a breakthrough from which any garden
variety genius could have deduced.
A other breakthroughs could be made eventually leading to everything from
nuclear reactors to atomic bombs. As the 2016 book,
the Pope physics notes had firm's brain been firing in all cylinders at that
time, it's likely nuclear efficient. Would've been discovered in Italy in 1935.
One possible consequence is that Nazi Germany would've used that such to acquire
nuclear weapons. It's a scary thought that out there, just a few degrees away.
It's a parallel universe where the London blitz was not a sustained campaign,
but a single bomb falling from the sky that turns the British capital into
rubble in a flash of light.
Luckily though we don't live in that universe in our universe firm's brain.
For some reason, wasn't quite operating at full capacity.
He merely thought he'd created a new element. One,
the press argued should be named after mu Salini.
By the time everyone figured out what was actually going on and he head start in
Nazi, Germany could have got on the bomb was gone in terms of near misses.
They don't get much nearer than that. Still firm's work was important.
Important enough him to be awarded the Nobel prize in physics in 1938.
And that's today's second stroke of good luck because 1938 was when everything
went to hell that summer mu suddenly brought in a raft of anti-Jewish laws.
So extreme worthy laws.
So nakedly modeled on Hitler that they penetrated even Furies physics adult. My,
although he was staunchly apolitical firmly,
couldn't ignore the fact that these new laws targeted his wife and probably
their children. Unfortunately,
the new laws also made it impossible for Jews to leave Italy without a very good
reason.
A reason like while perhaps winning the Nobel prize that December firmly
traveled to Sweden collect his Nobel prize for physics.
He took his family with him,
the no travel laws for Jews briefly waved on the understanding that the award
would bring glory on Italy. In Stockholm,
Bumi accepted his award that used his prize money to get himself his wife and
his children on a boat to the USA.
And that's how Italy's greatest modern scientist came to leave his country
behind for good,
his scary to think that had mu not suddenly passed those anti-Jewish laws.
Firmi would've likely stayed in Italy for the duration of the war.
All the I could do under rap Heimer would be lost.
Lost two would be the world's first nuclear actor soon to be built under Firmi
SW in Chicago.
And Firmi was just one of thousands of scientists who fled the consonant in the
those days had Europe's fascists not become so obsessed with the national
purity. The nations would ironically have lasted much longer on January.
The second, 1939. The firm arrived in New York city for the rest of their lives.
They'd call America home. Now just before we continue today,
I hope that you are not gonna be developing any nuclear bombs,
but if you'd like to get a better grasp on physics,
but let me tell you about brilliance.
Brilliant is a problem solving based website and app with a hands on approach.
They've got over 60 interactive courses in maths science and computer science.
Now you've heard me talk about brilliant before on this channel,
they teach you about this subjects I mentioned, but beyond that,
they also teach you problem solving skills, which are practical.
Even if you don't pursue the sciences,
learning how to break down complex problems to their component.
Parts is pretty critical in whatever career path you choose,
or maybe you've wanted to learn programming that you've always been a bit
daunted by it.
Normally it requires you to learn the tedious details if a specific grooming
language,
but really the bedrock of it is understanding the fundamental algorithms on
brilliant. You start by programming a drone with simple instructions,
which teaches you the basic structure of every program you'll ever write.
It's all drag and drop exercises,
which will get you thinking like a computer scientist in no time.
And that's just one example. There's loads of great stuff on their platform.
Form. Look, brilliance is a great compliment to watching videos like this one,
and it will really help you master even complex technical subjects.
So if you want to support biographics and get unlimited access to all of
brilliance in depth, maths and science courses,
please head over to brilliant org forward slash biographics and you'll get 20%
off that annual premium subscription. And let's go back to the video.
Barely had Firmi set foot inside Columbia,
that he was already gifting his new government breakthroughs.
That same spring 1939,
the Italian in his team showed that emitting neutrons into uranium was the
process of Phish. The, that could trigger a chain reaction. In other words,
Kaboom by March the university was already writing to the Navy suggesting that
this could be used as a weapon nor was firmly himself blind to this possibility.
One day in a Manhattan high rise.
He glanced out a window at the bustling city and Mert. This will bomb like that,
and it would all disappear. But firm,
he was no Oppenheimer tortured inside by the destruction.
His research could reek.
He actually went to Washington DC to personally try and drum up funding for
nuclear weapons research.
But his presentation was so singularly uncharismatic that he walked away with
only the smallest of grants.
It wasn't until Albertine Einstein personally wrote to Franklin D Roosevelt
about the potential for super weapons that the American government began to
really show some interest still. It was slow progress.
Only on December the sixth,
1941 was a project to study these theories in Chicago signed off on,
but if things had been moving slowly for firm's research up until that point,
they were about to gain a sense of extreme urgency. So you probably,
you remember the history class, you know what happened on December the seventh,
1941, the Japanese bombing of Pearl Harbor dragged America,
kicking and screaming into the war.
It also had the side effect that every Italian in the country was immediately
classed as an enemy alien and subjected to severe travel restrictions.
It took nearly six months for firm's restrictions to be waved for his research.
He finally arrived in Chicago in summer 1942,
but once he was there, Firmi almost immediately proved his worth.
We already spoke of one terrifying parallel universe where the access got the
bomb. Now we're going to speak about a much weirder one,
the universe where this video isn't titled Enrique,
Firmi the godfather of the atomic bomb,
but ENCO Firmi the mad scientist who destroyed Chicago firm and his team
assembled a nuclear reactor on the squash court of the university of Chicago
towards the end of 1942 on December.
The second they sent critical as the New York times later wrote of the
potentially dangerous experiments,
the only safeguards against an uncontrolled atomic chain reaction that would've
irradiated a significant part of Chicago was a scientist wielding.
And AXS cut the rope that held an emergency control.
Rod suspended from the balcony and a few other brave volunteers whose job was to
douse the runaway with buckets of neutron, absorbing Kam sulfate.
Firmi actually jokes that if the reactor went out of control,
the assembled deem should run and hide behind a big hill, many miles away.
But of course, Chicago pile one didn't become chin noble before chin noble,
it worked creating a self-sustaining atomic chain reaction.
The first work king nuclear reactor in history shortly after a code was
broadcast to Washington DC.
The Italian navigator has just landed in the new world and that was the
Dawn of the atomic age.
And it was also the Dawn of a new age in firm's work in 1944,
the Italian physicist became a naturalized us citizen shortly after he was sent
down to Los Alamo MOS to work on the Manhattan project under Robert Oppenheimer
Firmi was actually there on July the 16th, 1945.
When the first Plutonian bomb was tested at the infamous Trinity test in Alamo
Godo, New Mexico. This was the moment when Oppenheimer seeming the power.
He had unleashed thought the phrase. Now.
I am become deaf the destroyer of world.
But as we've said before,
Firmi was no Oppenheimer faced with the reality of a weapon capable of wiping
out entire cities in the blink of an eye.
Firmi only noted that the Trinity test was a labor of considerable scientific
interest.
In the last month of the Manassian project.
Firm's dedication to building the bomb did not waiver. Although in April,
he noted that their labors would one day be able to be reproduced by smaller
nations or even groups.
He still thought it a worthwhile endeavor that June he joined the scientific
panel of the interim committee group task in part with advising on the use of
atomic weapons against Japan,
just colleagues firmly advocated for an atomic strike.
Although some members of the panel did object unethical grounds preferring
instead, a public test that would give Japan warning.
President Harry Truman signed off on the attack just two months later on August
the sixth, 1945,
a bomb distilled from the work Firmi Oppenheimer and the other geniuses at Las
Alamos was loaded onto the Enola gay and flown off into the night sky.
Six hours later, the ano gays Bombay doors opened above the commercial ends.
Military city of Hiroshima, little boy dropped for 44 seconds.
At the end of that time, the world changed forever.
The first atomic bomb ever used in warfare was detonated precisely 16 minutes
and two seconds past eight in the morning, some 609 meters above Hiroshima.
Within 0.1 of a second,
the air over the city center had reached 277,760 degrees
Celsius.
A woman sat nearly a kilometer away on the banks of the city's river was
instantly vaporized.
As the fire expanded granite stones melted the internal organs of humans and
animals, vaporized and exposed skin was simply burned off.
By the time a single second had passed a blast wave traveling 1,500 kilometers
an hour had torn the clothes off,
nearly everyone in the city destroyed 60,000 buildings and an
intense fast storm that started that would rage the hours and hours in that
instant 80,000 people died including up to 20,000 Korean slave laborers and over
a dozen allied POWs,
many tens of thousands would die of radiation poisoning over the coming weeks.
It was carnage on a previously unimaginable scale and it wasn't over
three days later on August the ninth,
another plane carrying another bomb flew over Japan.
Originally it was meant to drop its payload on the ancient city of Kora,
but thick cloud meant that Nagasaki became its target at 11:02 AM.
Fatman exploded above the port city turning 40,000 into Ash.
It was the seconds.
And to date the last time atomic weapons have been used in warfare,
six days later, Japan surrendered unconditionally today,
it remains up for debate whether the real motivation for Japanese surrender was
the two atomic bombs or the SRS declaration of war on the same day as
Nagasaki, whatever the truth,
the is no denying that the weapons Firmey helped build had just shocked the
world. By now, though, the war was already over in Europe, in Italy,
partisans had captured mu stringing up his corpse in a Milan square Hitler.
Two was dead killed by a self-inflicted gunshot in his fewer bunker.
The fascist suit chased Firmey and his family out of Europe were gone.
Physicist could now go back to his home country whenever he chose,
but what remains Italy for him?
His wife's family who were killed in the Holocaust, Rome Le and ruins.
Instead in fall of 1945,
Firmi accepted a teaching position at the university of Chicago.
He would live in that city for the rest of his life.
The last years of ENCO firm's life were marked by a returns.
The Magine like fascination that characterized his earlier years at Chicago.
He moved on from nuclear physics and began researching elementary particles
before becoming obsessed with cosmic race.
Perhaps his most famous contribution to science in this time though came not in
the form of a discovery, but of a question,
where is everybody in 1950 permi was launching with some colleagues when they
began to discuss alien civilizations.
It was three years after the supposed Roswell crash at the line.
When UFOs ruled the rage,
one by one firm's friends asserted that there were undoubtedly aliens out there
in the galaxy. It was at this point firmly asked his question,
where is everybody may sound like a flip remark, but Firmi had a serious point.
He'd realized that given the immense age of the galaxy,
any civilization with even the most rudimentary rocket analogy should have
colonized it by now assuming even a hyper conservative estimate for how often an
intelligent civilization arises,
the sheer timescales involved meant there should be abundant evidence of aliens
by now. So again, where is everyone today?
That simple question is known as the firmly paradox and the list of explanations
as to why there are no signs of alien life could fill a dozen videos all by
themselves. Seriously, if you want to go down an infinite click,
I'll just type the great filter or dark forest theory into Google.
But while Firmey may have MedEd in many disciplines in his later years,
he could never quite escape the one running threat through his working
life nuclear physics in 1949,
Firmi joins the general advisory committee to the atomic energy commission that
year. The S R had tested its fast atomic weapon.
And the committee had gathered to decide on the practical ands moral
implications of the USA, developing thermonuclear devices.
Unlike the atomic bombing of Japan Firmi was steadfastly against the idea
hydrogen bomb.
He wrote in a dissension from the majority opinion becomes a weapon,
which in practical effect is almost one of genocide.
It is necessarily an evil thing considered in any light after
a lifetime with no political opinions at all,
li seemed en Rico Firmey was finally waking up to a world where governments
might use as discoveries for evil, but this new mindset,
it only went so far when Truman signed off on the H bomb.
Firmi beautifully went back to Los Alamos to work on it.
It is said he hope to prove such a weapon was impossible. If that's the case,
when he was doomed to disappointment,
the world's first hydrogen bomb was tested in the Marshall Islands on November
1st, 1952, the exploit was so vast.
So world changing in its implications that it graced the cover of time.
Not long after that firme came up with his own pessimistic answer to the Firmi
paradox.
There were no alien civilizations because they'd all wiped themselves out with
Thermo nuclear weapons, still Firmi being Firmi. He carried on working.
There were doubtless more discovery he's out there to be made in the summer of
1954, even went back to Italy,
hiking in the mountains and enjoying the air of the old country.
At least that was his plan. The reality was firm.
He found himself feeling constantly run down.
When he returned to Chicago at the end end of his vacation,
he went straight to the doctor.
Since you can already see we're nearing the end of this video,
you can probably guess what came next. The doctor told firm me,
he had stomach cancer, although they tried to cure it.
The disease was already farty advanced ENCO Firmi died on November the 28th,
1954. He was 53 today.
Firm's name lives on most notably in the paradox named after him and the element
firm discovered in 1953, while it's doubtful.
The average Joe has heard of him.
He remains highly respected genius who still gets his due yet.
It's interesting to recall just how unlikely this great reputation was.
If things been just a shade different for me could have gone down in history as
the man who accidentally gave the access the bomb,
or he could have become trapped in Italy in 1938 and perished alongside his wife
in the Holocaust.
He may have even made it to America only to send Chicago pile one out of control
and caused the world's first nuclear meltdown. Thankfully,
this universe is one where disaster never struck where firm's genius helped
shape the world rather than end it. He may have lived a relatively short life,
but Firmi did enough work in his five decades to fill hundreds of lifetimes.
So I really hope you found that video. Interesting. If you did,
please do smash that thumbs up bottom balloon. Don't forget to subscribe.
Also do support this channel and check at our fantastic sponsor brilliance,
who I'm linking to below. And thank you for watching.